# New York State High School Graduation Data<br/>STAT  471 Final Project<br/>Kennedy Manley<br/>December 19, 2021

High school graduates are proven to have better quality of life due to higher income, better living conditions, expanded access to health care, and overall more beneficial opportunities. It is important to encourage the population to graduate from high school because it benefits personal success, but also the economy. Hence, for my final project, I decided to look into the graduation rates from the New York high school system for the 2019-2020 school year. Although, this is just a singular state, the New York population is one of the largest in the United States. Additionally, this data only looks at one school year which could have some particular factor that caused that specific year to give unique results. However, analyzing New York High School Graduation Rates could increase knowledge about trends, find certain subsets of people or geographic regions that need to be supported more throughout high school to encourage high school graduation, and determine the alternate paths student choose instead of receiving their high school diploma.

The data for this research project was acquired from the New York State Education Department website. The New York State Education Department (NYSED) is committed to publicly reporting data so that people can be better informed in their work to improve student achievement. The NYSED separates data by school year and provided their graduation rate database for download. The graduation rate database is described as "This database contains annual graduation, and dropout data for the state as well as by county, Need to Resource Capacity group, district, public school and charter school. Annual graduation data is included for the current four-year cohort (June and August graduates), five-year June and August, and six-year June and August cohorts." The primary response variable of interest is the graduation rate, which had to be calculated by hand since the formatting of the downloaded data set did not allow for much manipulation of the given variable. The numerical explanatory variables were also manipulated to be in numeric form to allow for calculation and manipulation. There are both categorical and quantitative variables, but this research focuses primarily on the quantitative factors and the categorical factors that can be written as factors.

After downloading the data, but before exploring the data and running analysis, the data was split into a training dataset and test dataset. The test dataset was exclusively used for evaluating performance of the difference models. The training dataset was used to run many different tests and models to see how the different variables contributed to the graduation rates. Models were built and run to determine the best way to classify this data. The different models included linear regression, ridge regression, lasso regression, elastic net regression, random forest, and classification trees. The efficiency of the model was evaluated based on the computed root mean squared error (RMSE) and the misclassification error rates.

The overall data analysis pointed towards the lasso regression model being the best model for this data analysis. The lasso method worked well for this data because it shrinks the coefficients of some factors which can provide the best fit since there is no inclusion of unnecessary factors. The root mean squared error was used to assess model fit for lasso regression and it concluded an RMSE of 0.76 which is significantly lower than the error rates of the other models. The linear regression model provided the lowest error rate, but inaccuracies with the factors and type of test led to an inconclusive result that will be discussed later. Hopefully, this analysis can lead to the increased efforts to escalate high school graduation rates for New York State, and the entire US population. 
